---
layout: post
title: "Lecture 16: Solving LPs using Multiplicative Weights"
date: 2018-10-03
use_math: true
---

## Farkas' Lemma and Feasibility

At the end of lecture, we went over the discussion of infeasibility a
bit fast. Here's a longer discussion, which is particlarly useful in
case you have not seen this before. Suppose we have an LP:

$$ \min \{ c^\intercal x \mid Ax \geq b, x \geq 0 \}. $$

If this is feasible, I can prove this to you by giving you a feasible
$x$. But what if this LP is not feasible? How do I prove it to you?
Suppose I show you a vector $p \in \mathbb{R}^m$, such that $y \geq
\mathbf{0}$, and 

$$ p^\intercal A \leq \mathbf{0} \qquad \text{and} \qquad p^\intercal b
> 0. \qquad (\star)$$

In this case I claim the LP is infeasible, there are no points $x$ that
satisfy $Ax \geq b, x \geq 0$. Why? If there were, then left-multiplying
by $p^\intercal$ would give

$$p^\intercal A x \leq p^\intercal b.$$

(Here we used that $p$ was non-negative, so multiplying by it did not
flip the direction of the inequality.) But we know from $(\star)$ that
$p^\intercal A \geq \mathbf{0}$, and $p^\intercal b > 0$, so this is
impossible. Hence exhibiting such a vector $p \in \R^m$ shows that an LP
is infeasible.

In fact, Farkas' Lemma from 1894 says that this is an if-and-only-if
statement. The above argument says that if there exists such a vector,
the LP is infeasible. In fact, if the LP is infeasible, there always
exists such a vector. Equivalently, if there does not exist such a
vector, the LP is feasible.

And today's discussion gives another proof of this. Basically, suppose
that for some vector $p^t$ produced by Hedge we could not find a
solution to the "average LP" $(p^t)^\intercal A x \leq (p^t)^\intercal
b$ we produced. Then the above argument shows that the LP must be
infeasible. And conversely, suppose we could always find a solution
$x^t$ to the "average" LP. Then we saw that for any $\varepsilon > 0$,
there was a time $T$ after which $\hat{x} := \frac1T \sum_{t = 1}^t x^t$
gives a solution $\hat{x} \geq 0$ for which $A \hat{x} \geq b -
\varepsilon \mathbf{1}$. We claim that when $\varepsilon$ is small
enough, then we can "round" $\hat{x}$ to a bonafide solution $\bar{x}$,
thereby showing that the LP is feasible, and proving the second part of
Farkas' lemma. (Details on this "rounding" to come some other day.)
