---
layout: post
title: "Lecture 2: Min-Cost Arborescences"
date: 2018-08-29
---

Today's lecture about min-cost arborescences featured several new ideas;
let me quickly go over some of them here.

1. We saw one algorithm, and two proofs of correctness for it.  The
   second, LP-based proof was Edmonds' original 1966 proof, the first
   proof was Karp's from 1971.  (In case you were wondering, both were
   correct.)  Karp's is indeed a simplification of Edmonds', so why
   teach both? The point was to show you the technique --- the idea that
   even though the algorithm was combinatorial, we could use the LP as
   an analysis tool. This will be useful in other settings, e.g., when
   we want to analyze algorithms for finding matchings in graphs.
   
2. I find it convenient to think of the LP-based proof as follows: the
   dual is a bank account. You start off with a zero primal cost and a
   zero dual value. Hence the initial dual is feasible, but the initial
   primal is not. Now suppose every time you "spend money" in the
   primal, you increase the dual by the same amount. This way you
   maintain that primal cost equals the dual value, and that the dual is
   feasible. So when the primal eventually becomes feasible, you know
   the primal and dual are equal and feasible, and hence both are
   optimal (by weak duality).

3. This technique of coming up with a dual that matches the primal cost
   is often called "dual fitting".

4. If you want to take a stab at doing dual-fitting proofs yourself, you
   should try to show that the following algorithm also works when the
   arc weights are negative. Let $-M$ be the largest negative weight.
   For each vertex, add $M$ to each arc leaving it, so that all edges
   become non-negative. Now run the algorithm we gave in class.

   Show that this is optimal using dual-fitting. But now use the LP
   *equality* constraint $\sum_{e \in \partial^+_v} x_e = 1$, and don't
   replace it by a weaker inequality. (Why not?)

As always, feel free to ask questions in office hours, on piazza, and in
lecture! See you Friday.
